usecase-2.4/README.md, before:

# SIESTA - work package 15 - use case 2.4

This is a specific use case that serves as a prototype for development and testing the SIESTA computational strategy for sensitive medical imaging data on representative BIDS datasets. The general outline is provided in the [documentation](../docs/README.md). In short, it consists of these steps:

1. the _data rights holder_ transferring the data onto the platform and making a scrambled version
2. the _data user_ implementing and testing the pipeline on the scrambled version
3. the _platform operator_ running the differential private computation on the resampled version of the original data

In the absence of a complete implementation of the SIESTA platform, this prototype use case requires that we bootstrap the whole process. The data transfer, the pipeline development, and the pipeline execution are all performed by wp15 members.

In the following it is assumed that the wp15 repository with the code for all use cases is as `wp15` and that the data for all use cases is stored in a directory called `data` with subdirectories for each use case. Depending on where you store the code and the data on your computer, you may have to change some paths in the instructions below.

## Data rights holder

### Summary of the input data

The input data is a freely available online resource named ["ERP CORE"](https://doi.org/10.18115/D5JW4R), consisting of optimized paradigms, experiment control scripts, example data from 40 neurotypical adults, data processing pipelines and analysis scripts, and a broad set of results for 7 widely used ERP components: N170, mismatch negativity (MMN), N2pc, N400, P3, lateralized readiness potential (LRP), and error-related negativity (ERN).

The input data consists of about 2000 files with a combined size of 24.1GB.

Included in this dataset are:

1. Raw data files for all 7 ERP components from 40 participants
2. The event code schemes for all experiment paradigms
3. The task stimuli used for eliciting N170, MMN, and N400, located in the stimuli folder
4. Demographic information for all 40 participants ("participants.tsv & participants.json")

### Data transfer

The data can be downloaded from [ERPCore BIDS dataset](https://osf.io/9f5w7/files/osfstorage) or by installing and running the [osfclient](https://github.com/osfclient/osfclient). The osfclient downloads the data an order of magnitude faster, is more stable for long downloads, and ensures that the directory structure is preserved.

```console
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install osfclient

mkdir data/usecase-2.4
cd data/usecase-2.4

osf -p 9f5w7 clone download                                 # this writes to a subdirectory contained in the directory "download"
mv download/osfstorage/ERP_CORE_BIDS_Raw_Files ./input      # move and rename the subdirectory to "input"
rm -rf download                                             # this is now empty
```

### Constructing the scrambled data

As in SIESTA the data is assumed to be sensitive, the analysis is conceived to be designed and implemented on a scrambled version of the dataset. Note that that is not needed here, as the original input and output data can be accessed directly.

 A scrambled version of the data can be generated using [BIDScramble](https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15/tree/main/BIDScramble).

```console
cd data/usecase-2.4
scramble input scrambled stub
scramble input scrambled json -p '.*'
scramble input scrambled brainvision
```

### Privacy assessment on the scrambled data

To be discussed and documented here.

### Data citation

Emily S. Kappenman, Jaclyn L. Farrens, Wendy Zhang, Andrew X. Stewart, Steven J. Luck (2021). ERP CORE: An open resource for human event-related potential research. NeuroImage. doi:j.neuroimage.2020.117465

### Legal aspects of the input data

The input dataset has been released under the [CC-BY-4.0](https://spdx.org/licenses/CC-BY-4.0.html) license.

## Data user

The data user's pipeline implements the [Event-Related Potential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-related_potential) (ERP) analysis of 'classical' [ElectroEncephalography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroencephalography) research paradigms. This represents a very common type of biomedical data. The data are simple enough, allow automated data processing, and follows the BIDS standard.

The pipeline is expected to be executed on a Linux computer, although it might also work on macOS or Windows.

### Output data

The output data that is to be shared consists of folders and files that represent group-level aggregated data. Many more individual-subject files are generated but these should not be shared with the researcher.

The `whitelist.txt` file contains a complete list of the output data that is to be shared.

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
mkdir output
```

### Software installation

This requires the GitHub wp15 repository, [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com) with the [EEGLAB](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab) external toolbox. Once EEGLAB is installed, the [LIMO MEEG master version](https://github.com/LIMO-EEG-Toolbox/limo_tools/tree/master) plugin needs to be installed inside the EEGLAB plugin folder as shown below.

There are also a number of additional EEGLAB plugins/dependencies (bids-matlab-tools, zapline-plus, bva-io, clean_rawdata, Firfilt, PICARD, ICLabel and Fieldtrip-lite). Some come by default with EEGLAB, but the code below ensures they are all there.

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15.git
cd wp15/usecase2.4

wget https://github.com/sccn/eeglab/archive/refs/tags/2024.2.1.zip
unzip 2024.2.1.zip
mv eeglab-2024.2.1 eeglab
rm 2024.2.1.zip

git clone -b v4.0 --depth 1 https://github.com/LIMO-EEG-Toolbox/limo_tools.git
mv limo_tools           eeglab/plugins/limo_tools

wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/fieldtrip-lite-20240111.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/bva-io1.73.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/firfilt2.8.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/ICLabel1.6.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/clean_rawdata2.91.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/zapline-plus1.2.1.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/picard-matlab.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/bids-matlab-tools8.0.zip

unzip fieldtrip-lite-20240111.zip
unzip bva-io1.73.zip
unzip firfilt2.8.zip
unzip ICLabel1.6.zip
unzip clean_rawdata2.91.zip
unzip zapline-plus1.2.1.zip
unzip picard-matlab.zip
unzip bids-matlab-tools8.0.zip

rm *.zip

mv fieldtrip-20240111   eeglab/plugins/Fieldtrip-lite20240111
mv bva-io               eeglab/plugins/bva-io1.73
mv firfilt              eeglab/plugins/firfilt2.8
mv ICLabel              eeglab/plugins/ICLabel1.6
mv clean_rawdata        eeglab/plugins/clean_rawdata2.91
mv zapline-plus-1.2.1   eeglab/plugins/apline-plus1.2.1
mv picard-matlab        eeglab/plugins/PICARD1.0
mv bids-matlab-tools    eeglab/plugins/bids-matlab-tools8.0
```

Once all is installed, it should look like this

```console
├── README.md (this file)
├── work
│   ├── bidsapp.m
│   ├── ERP_Core_WB.m
│   ├── ERP_Core_WB_install.m
│   └── ERP_Core_eeglab2brainvision.m
├── eeglab
│   ├── [..]
│   ├── eeglab.m
│   ├── eeglab.prj
│   ├── functions
│   ├── plugins
│   |   └── bids-matlab-tools8.0
│   |   └── bva-io1.73
│   |   └── clean_rawdata2.91
│   |   └── Fieldtrip-lite20240111
│   |   └── firfilt2.8
│   |   └── ICLabel1.6
│   |   └── limo_tools
│   |   └── PICARD1.0
│   |   └── zapline-plus1.2.1
│   │   └── [..]
├── input
│   ├── CHANGES
│   ├── LICENSE
│   ├── [..]
│   ├── sub-001
│   ├── sub-002
│   ├── sub-003
│   └── [..]
└── output
```

### Testing the pipeline

Executing the pipeline from the MATLAB command window is done like this:

```matlab
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
restoredefaultpath
addpath eeglab
addpath work

bidsapp input output participant
bidsapp input output group
```

Executing the pipeline from the Linux terminal is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.4; restoredefaultpath; addpath eeglab work; bidsapp input output participant"
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.4; restoredefaultpath; addpath eeglab work; bidsapp input output group"
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written. For the prototype you can test the pipeline both on the original input data and on the scrambled data in the `scrambled` directory.

### Legal aspects of the software

MATLAB is commercial software.

EEGLAB is open source and released under the 2-clause BSD license.

LIMO MEEG is open-source software released under the MIT License.

FieldTrip is open source software and released under the GPLv3 license.

The code that is specific to the analysis pipeline is shared under the CC0 license.

## Platform operator

The platform operator should be assumed to have no domain specific knowledge about the data, about the software, about the analysis pipeline, or about the results that it generates. The platform operator just executes the required containers following the [computational workflow](docs/workflow.md).

The documentation provided here is for Apptainer imagines, which allows wp15 members to develop and test. Once the use case is past the prototype stage, Docker images might be used instead.

The documentation provided here is also just for a minimal test that does not consider differential privacy yet.

### Transferring the data

The platform operator can download the data using the corresponding container (only for testing purposes) and the following instructions:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer build download.sif download.def
apptainer run download.sif ../../data/usecase-2.4/input
```

You may have to replace the `input` directory in the example above with the desired location on your computer.

### Containerizing the pipeline

You can install the software in an Apptainer container image like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer build pipeline.sif pipeline.def
```

### Executing the pipeline as container

Executing the pipeline from the Apptainer image is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output participant
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output group
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written.

Commit message:

specify the computational requirements per use case

usecase-2.4/README.md, after:

# SIESTA - work package 15 - use case 2.4

This is a specific use case that serves as a prototype for development and testing the SIESTA computational strategy for sensitive medical imaging data on representative BIDS datasets. The general outline is provided in the [documentation](../docs/README.md). In short, it consists of these steps:

1. the _data rights holder_ transferring the data onto the platform and making a scrambled version
2. the _data user_ implementing and testing the pipeline on the scrambled version
3. the _platform operator_ running the differential private computation on the resampled version of the original data

In the absence of a complete implementation of the SIESTA platform, this prototype use case requires that we bootstrap the whole process. The data transfer, the pipeline development, and the pipeline execution are all performed by wp15 members.

In the following it is assumed that the wp15 repository with the code for all use cases is as `wp15` and that the data for all use cases is stored in a directory called `data` with subdirectories for each use case. Depending on where you store the code and the data on your computer, you may have to change some paths in the instructions below.

## Data rights holder

### Summary of the input data

The input data is a freely available online resource named ["ERP CORE"](https://doi.org/10.18115/D5JW4R), consisting of optimized paradigms, experiment control scripts, example data from 40 neurotypical adults, data processing pipelines and analysis scripts, and a broad set of results for 7 widely used ERP components: N170, mismatch negativity (MMN), N2pc, N400, P3, lateralized readiness potential (LRP), and error-related negativity (ERN).

The input data consists of about 2000 files with a combined size of 24.1GB.

Included in this dataset are:

1. Raw data files for all 7 ERP components from 40 participants
2. The event code schemes for all experiment paradigms
3. The task stimuli used for eliciting N170, MMN, and N400, located in the stimuli folder
4. Demographic information for all 40 participants ("participants.tsv & participants.json")

### Data transfer

The data can be downloaded from [ERPCore BIDS dataset](https://osf.io/9f5w7/files/osfstorage) or by installing and running the [osfclient](https://github.com/osfclient/osfclient). The osfclient downloads the data an order of magnitude faster, is more stable for long downloads, and ensures that the directory structure is preserved.

```console
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install osfclient

mkdir data/usecase-2.4
cd data/usecase-2.4

osf -p 9f5w7 clone download                                 # this writes to a subdirectory contained in the directory "download"
mv download/osfstorage/ERP_CORE_BIDS_Raw_Files ./input      # move and rename the subdirectory to "input"
rm -rf download                                             # this is now empty
```

### Constructing the scrambled data

As in SIESTA the data is assumed to be sensitive, the analysis is conceived to be designed and implemented on a scrambled version of the dataset. Note that that is not needed here, as the original input and output data can be accessed directly.

 A scrambled version of the data can be generated using [BIDScramble](https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15/tree/main/BIDScramble).

```console
cd data/usecase-2.4
scramble input scrambled stub
scramble input scrambled json -p '.*'
scramble input scrambled brainvision
```

### Privacy assessment on the scrambled data

To be discussed and documented here.

### Data citation

Emily S. Kappenman, Jaclyn L. Farrens, Wendy Zhang, Andrew X. Stewart, Steven J. Luck (2021). ERP CORE: An open resource for human event-related potential research. NeuroImage. doi:j.neuroimage.2020.117465

### Legal aspects of the input data

The input dataset has been released under the [CC-BY-4.0](https://spdx.org/licenses/CC-BY-4.0.html) license.

## Data user

The data user's pipeline implements the [Event-Related Potential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-related_potential) (ERP) analysis of 'classical' [ElectroEncephalography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroencephalography) research paradigms. This represents a very common type of biomedical data. The data are simple enough, allow automated data processing, and follows the BIDS standard.

The pipeline is expected to be executed on a Linux computer, although it might also work on macOS or Windows.

### Computational requirements for the participant level

The execution of the pipeline for each participant takes XX GB of RAM, XX seconds per subject, and results in XX GB of temporary data per subject.

There are 40 subjects.

### Computational requirements for the group level

The execution of the group-level pipeline takes XX GB of RAM, XX seconds, and results in XX GB of temporary data per leave-one-out sample.

### Output data

The output data that is to be shared consists of folders and files that represent group-level aggregated data. Many more individual-subject files are generated but these should not be shared with the researcher.

The `whitelist.txt` file contains a complete list of the output data that is to be shared.

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
mkdir output
```

### Software installation

This requires the GitHub wp15 repository, [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com) with the [EEGLAB](https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab) external toolbox. Once EEGLAB is installed, the [LIMO MEEG master version](https://github.com/LIMO-EEG-Toolbox/limo_tools/tree/master) plugin needs to be installed inside the EEGLAB plugin folder as shown below.

There are also a number of additional EEGLAB plugins/dependencies (bids-matlab-tools, zapline-plus, bva-io, clean_rawdata, Firfilt, PICARD, ICLabel and Fieldtrip-lite). Some come by default with EEGLAB, but the code below ensures they are all there.

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15.git
cd wp15/usecase2.4

wget https://github.com/sccn/eeglab/archive/refs/tags/2024.2.1.zip
unzip 2024.2.1.zip
mv eeglab-2024.2.1 eeglab
rm 2024.2.1.zip

git clone -b v4.0 --depth 1 https://github.com/LIMO-EEG-Toolbox/limo_tools.git
mv limo_tools           eeglab/plugins/limo_tools

wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/fieldtrip-lite-20240111.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/bva-io1.73.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/firfilt2.8.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/ICLabel1.6.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/clean_rawdata2.91.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/zapline-plus1.2.1.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/picard-matlab.zip
wget https://sccn.ucsd.edu/eeglab/plugins/bids-matlab-tools8.0.zip

unzip fieldtrip-lite-20240111.zip
unzip bva-io1.73.zip
unzip firfilt2.8.zip
unzip ICLabel1.6.zip
unzip clean_rawdata2.91.zip
unzip zapline-plus1.2.1.zip
unzip picard-matlab.zip
unzip bids-matlab-tools8.0.zip

rm *.zip

mv fieldtrip-20240111   eeglab/plugins/Fieldtrip-lite20240111
mv bva-io               eeglab/plugins/bva-io1.73
mv firfilt              eeglab/plugins/firfilt2.8
mv ICLabel              eeglab/plugins/ICLabel1.6
mv clean_rawdata        eeglab/plugins/clean_rawdata2.91
mv zapline-plus-1.2.1   eeglab/plugins/apline-plus1.2.1
mv picard-matlab        eeglab/plugins/PICARD1.0
mv bids-matlab-tools    eeglab/plugins/bids-matlab-tools8.0
```

Once all is installed, it should look like this

```console
├── README.md (this file)
├── work
│   ├── bidsapp.m
│   ├── ERP_Core_WB.m
│   ├── ERP_Core_WB_install.m
│   └── ERP_Core_eeglab2brainvision.m
├── eeglab
│   ├── [..]
│   ├── eeglab.m
│   ├── eeglab.prj
│   ├── functions
│   ├── plugins
│   |   └── bids-matlab-tools8.0
│   |   └── bva-io1.73
│   |   └── clean_rawdata2.91
│   |   └── Fieldtrip-lite20240111
│   |   └── firfilt2.8
│   |   └── ICLabel1.6
│   |   └── limo_tools
│   |   └── PICARD1.0
│   |   └── zapline-plus1.2.1
│   │   └── [..]
├── input
│   ├── CHANGES
│   ├── LICENSE
│   ├── [..]
│   ├── sub-001
│   ├── sub-002
│   ├── sub-003
│   └── [..]
└── output
```

### Testing the pipeline

Executing the pipeline from the MATLAB command window is done like this:

```matlab
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
restoredefaultpath
addpath eeglab
addpath work

bidsapp input output participant
bidsapp input output group
```

Executing the pipeline from the Linux terminal is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.4; restoredefaultpath; addpath eeglab work; bidsapp input output participant"
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.4; restoredefaultpath; addpath eeglab work; bidsapp input output group"
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written. For the prototype you can test the pipeline both on the original input data and on the scrambled data in the `scrambled` directory.

### Legal aspects of the software

MATLAB is commercial software.

EEGLAB is open source and released under the 2-clause BSD license.

LIMO MEEG is open-source software released under the MIT License.

FieldTrip is open source software and released under the GPLv3 license.

The code that is specific to the analysis pipeline is shared under the CC0 license.

## Platform operator

The platform operator should be assumed to have no domain specific knowledge about the data, about the software, about the analysis pipeline, or about the results that it generates. The platform operator just executes the required containers following the [computational workflow](docs/workflow.md).

The documentation provided here is for Apptainer imagines, which allows wp15 members to develop and test. Once the use case is past the prototype stage, Docker images might be used instead.

The documentation provided here is also just for a minimal test that does not consider differential privacy yet.

### Transferring the data

The platform operator can download the data using the corresponding container (only for testing purposes) and the following instructions:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer build download.sif download.def
apptainer run download.sif ../../data/usecase-2.4/input
```

You may have to replace the `input` directory in the example above with the desired location on your computer.

### Containerizing the pipeline

You can install the software in an Apptainer container image like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer build pipeline.sif pipeline.def
```

### Executing the pipeline as container

Executing the pipeline from the Apptainer image is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.4
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output participant
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output group
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written.
