usecase-2.5/README.md, before:

# SIESTA - work package 15 - use case 2.5 (4D imaging space * time)

This is a specific use case that serves as a prototype for development and testing the SIESTA computational strategy for sensitive medical imaging data on representative BIDS datasets. The general outline is provided in the [documentation](docs/README.md). In short, it consists of these steps:

1. the _data rights holder_ transferring the data onto the platform and making a scrambled version
2. the _data user_ implementing and testing the pipeline on the scrambled version
3. the _platform operator_ running the differential private computation on the resampled version of the original data

In the absence of a complete implementation of the SIESTA platform, this prototype use case requires that we bootstrap the whole process. The data transfer, the pipeline development, and the pipeline execution are all performed by wp15 members.

In the following it is assumed that the wp15 repository with the code for all use cases is as `wp15` and that the data for all use cases is stored in a directory called `data` with subdirectories for each use case. Depending on where you store the code and the data on your computer, you may have to change some paths in the instructions below.

## Data rights holder

### Summary of the input data

The input data is freely available from "OpenNeuro" with the Accession Number [ds004934](https://doi.org/10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0). The dataset includes 44 subjects who are divided into two experiments: 17 subjects undergo fMRIs dedicated to experiment 1, whereas 29 subjects undergo fMRIs dedicated to experiment 2.

The input data consists of about 1548 files with a combined size of 18.63G.

### Data transfer

The data can be downloaded using the Amazon [AWS command-line interface](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html) or using [datalad](https://www.datalad.org/).

```console
mkdir data/usecase-2.5
cd data/usecase-2.5

aws s3 cp --recursive --no-sign-request s3://openneuro.org/ds004934/ input
```

To resume a partially complete download that was interrupted you can do

```console
aws s3 sync --no-sign-request s3://openneuro.org/ds004934/ input
```

Alternatively, you can download the data with the openneuro [cli](https://docs.openneuro.org/packages/openneuro-cli.html) (requires Node.js v18 or higher to be installed). To install a specific (latest) version of Node.js you can [install nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm?tab=readme-ov-file#installing-and-updating) and manage your node installation(s) from there:

```console
wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.40.1/install.sh | bash
nvm install node    # "node" is an alias for the latest version
```

If your node installation is up-to-date and working then make sure you have an openneuro account and in a new termminal run:

```console
npm install -g @openneuro/cli

mkdir data/usecase-2.5
cd data/usecase-2.5

openneuro login
openneuro download ds004934 -s 1.0.0 input
```

Tip: Use e.g. Node.js version 21.7.3 if you get errors from the openneuro client

### Constructing the scrambled data

As in SIESTA the data is assumed to be sensitive, the analysis is conceived to be designed and implemented on a scrambled version of the dataset. Note that that is not needed here, as the original input and output data can be accessed directly.

 A scrambled version of the data can be generated using [BIDScramble](https://bidscramble.readthedocs.io).

```console
cd data/usecase-2.5
scramble input scrambled stub
scramble input scrambled json -p '(?!AcquisitionTime).*'
scramble input scrambled nii permute y -i
```

### Privacy assessment on the scrambled data

For the scrambled data you can ensure to what degree intended patterns or information are leaked from the original dataset. You can use [DatLeak](https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/DatLeak) to test for potential data leakage, checking whether the scrambled variables still contain any identifiable patterns that could be traced back to the original participants. DatLeak detects data leakage in anonymized datasets by comparing the original data with the scrambled version. It calculates **full leakage** (where all voxels are identical in an array) and **partial leakage** (where some, but not all, variables match). These calculation help assess the effectiveness of the anonymization process. Running DatLeak on scrambled datasets helps confirm that the anonymization process is robust and protects participant privacy.

#### Installing DatLeak is done by cloning its repository.

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/DatLeak.git
```
#### Usage 

```
python run.py <base dir original> <base dir scrambled> [report]
# example
python run.py usecase-2.5/input usecase-2.5/scrambled True/False
```
#### Output
The output will be:
- A brief information of the subject
- Spatial analysis full/partial leakage in different axis [x, y, z]
- Temporal analysis full/partial leakage in time [t]
- Total full/partial leakage of the image
   - Partial leakage will be assessed by numerical values where the maximum value  [0.999]  indicates the maximum information leaked
   - Full leakage will be assessed by True/False indicating whether or not the image needs to be re-scrambled
```
########################################
 - Subject ID: sub-SAXNES2s001
 - Task: DOTS
 - Run: run-001
 - Shape: (70, 70, 50, 248)
########################################
 - Spatial Analysis
 - Averaged over time dimension
	 - Dimension[X]: 	Full Leakage: 0/70 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.319
	 - Dimension[Y]: 	Full Leakage: 0/70 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.471
	 - Dimension[Z]: 	Full Leakage: 0/50 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.332
 - Temporal voxel-wise Analysis
	 - Total voxels: 245000 of shape (1, 1, 1, 248)
	 - Temporal: 	Full Leakage: 0/245000 voxels 	Average Partial Leakage 0.005
 - Partial Leakage: 0.462
 - Full Leakage: False
```


**NOTE:** 
- DatLeak is divided into two branches of **Tabular** and **NeuroImaging** folders, where anything related to BIDS dataset are stored in NeuroImaging folders.
- All subjects are expected to be right in **base dir original/scrambled** folders.
```
original/scrambled
├── sub-SAXNES2s001
│    ├── anat
│    └── func
├── sub-SAXNES2s002
│    ├── anat
│    └── func
├── ...
├── ...
```
### Data citation

The dataset itself can be cited with

- Shari Liu and Kirsten Lydic and Lingjie Mei and Rebecca Saxe (2024). fMRI dataset: Violations of psychological and physical expectations in human adult brains. OpenNeuro. [Dataset] [doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0](https://doi.org/10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0).

The publication that describes the study in more detail is

- Liu, S., Lydic, K., Mei, L., & Saxe, R. (2024). Violations of physical and psychological expectations in the human adult brain. Imaging Neuroscience. [doi:10.1162/imag_a_00068](https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00068).

### Legal aspects of the input data

The input dataset has been released under the [CC0](https://spdx.org/licenses/CC0-1.0.html) license.

## Data user

The data user's pipeline implements an SPM analysis on fMRI data that was recorded from participans engaged in a visual task.

The pipeline is expected to be executed on a Linux computer and MATLAB R2020b.

### Computational requirements for the participant level

The execution of the pipeline for each participant takes 2.2 GB of RAM, about 900 seconds per subject, and results in 685 GB of temporary data per subject in the output folder + an unspecified amount of anatomical image segmentation related intermediate data written into the input folder.

There are 44(?) subjects, 27 of which make it through the participant pipeline.

### Computational requirements for the group level

The execution of the group-level pipeline takes XX GB of RAM, XX seconds, and results in XX GB of temporary data per leave-one-out sample.

### Output data

The to-be-shared data in the output folder has the following directory structure:

```console
|-- group
|   |-- DOTS_run-001
|   |-- DOTS_run-002
|   |-- Motion_run-001
|   |-- Motion_run-002
|   |-- spWM_run-001
|   `-- spWM_run-002
```

Besides this, the output folder contains the per-subject intermediate (first-level) results. Those results are not to be shared and should not be on the whitelist

The `whitelist.txt` file contains a complete list of the output data that is to be shared.

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
mkdir output
```

### Software installation

This requires the Github source repository, SPM and MATLAB software.

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15.git

cd wp15/usecase-2.5
wget https://github.com/spm/spm12/archive/refs/tags/r7771.zip
unzip r7771.zip
mv spm12-r7771 spm12
rm r7771.zip
```

### Testing the pipeline

Executing the pipeline from the MATLAB command window is done like this:

```matlab
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
restoredefaultpath
addpath work
addpath spm12
addpath spm12/config
addpath spm12/matlabbatch

bidsapp input output participant
bidsapp input output group
```

Executing the pipeline from the Linux terminal is done using:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.5; restoredefaultpath; addpath work spm12 spm12/config spm12/matlabbatch; bidsapp input output participant"
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.5; restoredefaultpath; addpath work spm12 spm12/config spm12/matlabbatch; bidsapp input output group"
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written. For the prototype you can test the pipeline both on the original input data and on the scrambled data in the `scrambled` directory.

### Legal aspects of the software

MATLAB is commercial software.

SPM is open source software that is released under the GPLv2 license.

The code that is specific to the analysis pipeline is shared under the CC0 license.

## Platform operator

The platform operator should be assumed to have no domain specific knowledge about the data, about the software, about the analysis pipeline, or about the results that it generates. The platform operator just executes the required containers following the [computational workflow](docs/workflow.md).

The documentation provided here is for Apptainer imagines, which allows wp15 members to develop and test. Once the use case is past the prototype stage, Docker images might be used instead.

The documentation provided here is also just for a minimal test that does not consider differential privacy yet.

### Transferring the data

The platform operator can download the data using the corresponding container (only for testing purposes) and the following instructions:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer build download.sif download.def
apptainer run download.sif ../../data/usecase-2.5/input
```

You may have to replace the `input` directory in the example above with the desired location on your computer.

### Containerizing the pipeline

You can install the software in an Apptainer container image like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer build pipeline.sif pipeline.def
```

### Executing the pipeline as container

Executing the pipeline from the Apptainer image is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output participant
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output group
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written.

Commit message:

add section on the pipeline results, see #109. Also cleaned up formatting of DatLeak results section

usecase-2.5/README.md, after:

# SIESTA - work package 15 - use case 2.5 (4D imaging space * time)

This is a specific use case that serves as a prototype for development and testing the SIESTA computational strategy for sensitive medical imaging data on representative BIDS datasets. The general outline is provided in the [documentation](docs/README.md). In short, it consists of these steps:

1. the _data rights holder_ transferring the data onto the platform and making a scrambled version
2. the _data user_ implementing and testing the pipeline on the scrambled version
3. the _platform operator_ running the differential private computation on the resampled version of the original data

In the absence of a complete implementation of the SIESTA platform, this prototype use case requires that we bootstrap the whole process. The data transfer, the pipeline development, and the pipeline execution are all performed by wp15 members.

In the following it is assumed that the wp15 repository with the code for all use cases is as `wp15` and that the data for all use cases is stored in a directory called `data` with subdirectories for each use case. Depending on where you store the code and the data on your computer, you may have to change some paths in the instructions below.

## Data rights holder

### Summary of the input data

The input data is freely available from "OpenNeuro" with the Accession Number [ds004934](https://doi.org/10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0). The dataset includes 44 subjects who are divided into two experiments: 17 subjects undergo fMRIs dedicated to experiment 1, whereas 29 subjects undergo fMRIs dedicated to experiment 2.

The input data consists of about 1548 files with a combined size of 18.63G.

### Data transfer

The data can be downloaded using the Amazon [AWS command-line interface](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html) or using [datalad](https://www.datalad.org/).

```console
mkdir data/usecase-2.5
cd data/usecase-2.5

aws s3 cp --recursive --no-sign-request s3://openneuro.org/ds004934/ input
```

To resume a partially complete download that was interrupted you can do

```console
aws s3 sync --no-sign-request s3://openneuro.org/ds004934/ input
```

Alternatively, you can download the data with the openneuro [cli](https://docs.openneuro.org/packages/openneuro-cli.html) (requires Node.js v18 or higher to be installed). To install a specific (latest) version of Node.js you can [install nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm?tab=readme-ov-file#installing-and-updating) and manage your node installation(s) from there:

```console
wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.40.1/install.sh | bash
nvm install node    # "node" is an alias for the latest version
```

If your node installation is up-to-date and working then make sure you have an openneuro account and in a new termminal run:

```console
npm install -g @openneuro/cli

mkdir data/usecase-2.5
cd data/usecase-2.5

openneuro login
openneuro download ds004934 -s 1.0.0 input
```

Tip: Use e.g. Node.js version 21.7.3 if you get errors from the openneuro client

### Constructing the scrambled data

As in SIESTA the data is assumed to be sensitive, the analysis is conceived to be designed and implemented on a scrambled version of the dataset. Note that that is not needed here, as the original input and output data can be accessed directly.

 A scrambled version of the data can be generated using [BIDScramble](https://bidscramble.readthedocs.io).

```console
cd data/usecase-2.5
scramble input scrambled stub
scramble input scrambled json -p '(?!AcquisitionTime).*'
scramble input scrambled nii permute y -i
```

### Privacy assessment on the scrambled data

For the scrambled data you can ensure to what degree intended patterns or information are leaked from the original dataset. You can use [DatLeak](https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/DatLeak) to test for potential data leakage, checking whether the scrambled variables still contain any identifiable patterns that could be traced back to the original participants. DatLeak detects data leakage in anonymized datasets by comparing the original data with the scrambled version. It calculates **full leakage** (where all voxels are identical in an array) and **partial leakage** (where some, but not all, variables match). These calculation help assess the effectiveness of the anonymization process. Running DatLeak on scrambled datasets helps confirm that the anonymization process is robust and protects participant privacy.

#### Installing DatLeak is done by cloning its repository

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/DatLeak.git
```

#### Usage

```console
python run.py <base dir original> <base dir scrambled> [report]
# example
python run.py usecase-2.5/input usecase-2.5/scrambled True/False
```

#### Output

The output will be:

- A brief information of the subject
- Spatial analysis full/partial leakage in different axis [x, y, z]
- Temporal analysis full/partial leakage in time [t]
- Total full/partial leakage of the image
  - Partial leakage will be assessed by numerical values where the maximum value  [0.999]  indicates the maximum information leaked
  - Full leakage will be assessed by True/False indicating whether or not the image needs to be re-scrambled

```console
########################################
 - Subject ID: sub-SAXNES2s001
 - Task: DOTS
 - Run: run-001
 - Shape: (70, 70, 50, 248)
########################################
 - Spatial Analysis
 - Averaged over time dimension
	 - Dimension[X]: 	Full Leakage: 0/70 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.319
	 - Dimension[Y]: 	Full Leakage: 0/70 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.471
	 - Dimension[Z]: 	Full Leakage: 0/50 slices	Average Partial Leakage: 0.332
 - Temporal voxel-wise Analysis
	 - Total voxels: 245000 of shape (1, 1, 1, 248)
	 - Temporal: 	Full Leakage: 0/245000 voxels 	Average Partial Leakage 0.005
 - Partial Leakage: 0.462
 - Full Leakage: False
```

**NOTE:**

- DatLeak is divided into two branches of **Tabular** and **NeuroImaging** folders, where anything related to BIDS dataset are stored in NeuroImaging folders.
- All subjects are expected to be right in **base dir original/scrambled** folders.

```console
original/scrambled
├── sub-SAXNES2s001
│    ├── anat
│    └── func
├── sub-SAXNES2s002
│    ├── anat
│    └── func
├── ...
├── ...
```

### Data citation

The dataset itself can be cited with

- Shari Liu and Kirsten Lydic and Lingjie Mei and Rebecca Saxe (2024). fMRI dataset: Violations of psychological and physical expectations in human adult brains. OpenNeuro. [Dataset] [doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0](https://doi.org/10.18112/openneuro.ds004934.v1.0.0).

The publication that describes the study in more detail is

- Liu, S., Lydic, K., Mei, L., & Saxe, R. (2024). Violations of physical and psychological expectations in the human adult brain. Imaging Neuroscience. [doi:10.1162/imag_a_00068](https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00068).

### Legal aspects of the input data

The input dataset has been released under the [CC0](https://spdx.org/licenses/CC0-1.0.html) license.

## Data user

The data user's pipeline implements an SPM analysis on fMRI data that was recorded from participans engaged in a visual task.

The pipeline is expected to be executed on a Linux computer and MATLAB R2020b.

### Pipeline results

The analysis results in ...

### Computational requirements for the participant level

The execution of the pipeline for each participant takes 2.2 GB of RAM, about 900 seconds per subject, and results in 685 GB of temporary data per subject in the output folder + an unspecified amount of anatomical image segmentation related intermediate data written into the input folder.

There are 44(?) subjects, 27 of which make it through the participant pipeline.

### Computational requirements for the group level

The execution of the group-level pipeline takes XX GB of RAM, XX seconds, and results in XX GB of temporary data per leave-one-out sample.

### Output data

The to-be-shared data in the output folder has the following directory structure:

```console
|-- group
|   |-- DOTS_run-001
|   |-- DOTS_run-002
|   |-- Motion_run-001
|   |-- Motion_run-002
|   |-- spWM_run-001
|   `-- spWM_run-002
```

Besides this, the output folder contains the per-subject intermediate (first-level) results. Those results are not to be shared and should not be on the whitelist

The `whitelist.txt` file contains a complete list of the output data that is to be shared.

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
mkdir output
```

### Software installation

This requires the Github source repository, SPM and MATLAB software.

```console
git clone https://github.com/SIESTA-eu/wp15.git

cd wp15/usecase-2.5
wget https://github.com/spm/spm12/archive/refs/tags/r7771.zip
unzip r7771.zip
mv spm12-r7771 spm12
rm r7771.zip
```

### Testing the pipeline

Executing the pipeline from the MATLAB command window is done like this:

```matlab
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
restoredefaultpath
addpath work
addpath spm12
addpath spm12/config
addpath spm12/matlabbatch

bidsapp input output participant
bidsapp input output group
```

Executing the pipeline from the Linux terminal is done using:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.5; restoredefaultpath; addpath work spm12 spm12/config spm12/matlabbatch; bidsapp input output participant"
matlab -batch "cd wp15/usecase-2.5; restoredefaultpath; addpath work spm12 spm12/config spm12/matlabbatch; bidsapp input output group"
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written. For the prototype you can test the pipeline both on the original input data and on the scrambled data in the `scrambled` directory.

### Legal aspects of the software

MATLAB is commercial software.

SPM is open source software that is released under the GPLv2 license.

The code that is specific to the analysis pipeline is shared under the CC0 license.

## Platform operator

The platform operator should be assumed to have no domain specific knowledge about the data, about the software, about the analysis pipeline, or about the results that it generates. The platform operator just executes the required containers following the [computational workflow](docs/workflow.md).

The documentation provided here is for Apptainer imagines, which allows wp15 members to develop and test. Once the use case is past the prototype stage, Docker images might be used instead.

The documentation provided here is also just for a minimal test that does not consider differential privacy yet.

### Transferring the data

The platform operator can download the data using the corresponding container (only for testing purposes) and the following instructions:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer build download.sif download.def
apptainer run download.sif ../../data/usecase-2.5/input
```

You may have to replace the `input` directory in the example above with the desired location on your computer.

### Containerizing the pipeline

You can install the software in an Apptainer container image like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer build pipeline.sif pipeline.def
```

### Executing the pipeline as container

Executing the pipeline from the Apptainer image is done like this:

```console
cd wp15/usecase-2.5
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output participant
apptainer run --env MLM_LICENSE_FILE=port@server pipeline.sif input output group
```

You should replace the `input` and `output` directories in the instructions above with the ones where the actual data is located or should be written.
